README.md, before:

# docker-gc

* [Building](#building)
* [Installing](#installing)
* [Usage](#usage)
  * [Excluding Images From Garbage Collection](#excluding-images-from-garbage-collection)
  * [Excluding Containers From Garbage Collection](#excluding-containers-from-garbage-collection)
  * [Running as a Docker Image](#runnings-as-a-docker-image)
    * [Build the Docker Image](#build-the-docker-image)
    * [Running as a Docker Container](#running-as-a-docker-container)

A simple Docker container and image garbage collection script.

* Containers that exited more than an hour ago are removed.
* Images that don't belong to any remaining container after that are removed.

Although docker normally prevents removal of images that are in use by
containers, we take extra care to not remove any image tags (e.g., ubuntu:14.04,
busybox, etc) that are in use by containers. A naive `docker rmi $(docker images
-q)` will leave images stripped of all tags, forcing docker to re-pull the
repositories when starting new containers even though the images themselves are
still on disk.

This script is intended to be run as a cron job. You can also run it as a Docker
container (see below).

## Building

Build the debian package:

```sh
$ apt-get install git devscripts debhelper
$ git clone https://github.com/spotify/docker-gc.git
$ cd docker-gc
$ debuild -us -uc -b
```

If you get lintian errors during `debuild`, try `debuild --no-lintian -us -uc -b`.


## Installing

```sh
$ dpkg -i ../docker-gc_0.0.4_all.deb
```

This installs the `docker-gc` script into `/usr/sbin` and drops a `docker-gc`
cron file into `/etc/cron.hourly/`.


## Usage

To use the script manually, run `docker-gc`. The system user under
which `docker-gc` runs needs to have read and write access to
the `$STATE_DIR` environment variable which defaults to `/var/lib/docker-gc`.


### Excluding Images From Garbage Collection

There can be images that are large that serve as a common base for
many application containers, and as such, make sense to pin to the
machine, as many derivative containers will use it.  This can save
time in pulling those kinds of images.  There may be other reasons to
exclude images from garbage collection.  To do so, create
`/etc/docker-gc-exclude`, or if you want the file to be read from
elsewhere, set the `EXCLUDE_FROM_GC` environment variable to its
location.  This file can contain image name patterns (in the `grep`
sense), one per line, such as `spotify/cassandra:latest` or it can
contain image ids (truncated to the length shown in `docker images`
which is 12.

An example excludes file might contain:
```
spotify/cassandra:latest
9681260c3ad5
```

### Excluding Containers From Garbage Collection

There can also be containers (for example data only containers) which 
you would like to exclude from garbage collection. To do so, create 
`/etc/docker-gc-exclude-containers`, or if you want the file to be 
read from elsewhere, set the `EXCLUDE_CONTAINERS_FROM_GC` environment 
variable to its location. This file should container name patterns (in 
the `grep` sense), one per line, such as `mariadb-data`.

An example excludes file might contain:
```
mariadb-data
drunk_goodall
```

### Running as a Docker Image

A Dockerfile is provided as an alternative to a local installation. By default
the container will start up, run a single garbage collection, and shut down.

#### Build the Docker Image

```sh
docker build -t spotify/docker-gc .
```

#### Running as a Docker Container

The docker-gc container requires access to the docker socket in order to
function, so you need to map it when running, e.g.:

```sh
docker run --rm -v /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock -v /etc:/etc spotify/docker-gc
```

Commit message:

document building image with other Docker versions
Resolves #54

README.md, after:

# docker-gc

* [Building](#building)
* [Installing](#installing)
* [Usage](#usage)
  * [Excluding Images From Garbage Collection](#excluding-images-from-garbage-collection)
  * [Excluding Containers From Garbage Collection](#excluding-containers-from-garbage-collection)
  * [Running as a Docker Image](#runnings-as-a-docker-image)
    * [Build the Docker Image](#build-the-docker-image)
    * [Running as a Docker Container](#running-as-a-docker-container)

A simple Docker container and image garbage collection script.

* Containers that exited more than an hour ago are removed.
* Images that don't belong to any remaining container after that are removed.

Although docker normally prevents removal of images that are in use by
containers, we take extra care to not remove any image tags (e.g., ubuntu:14.04,
busybox, etc) that are in use by containers. A naive `docker rmi $(docker images
-q)` will leave images stripped of all tags, forcing docker to re-pull the
repositories when starting new containers even though the images themselves are
still on disk.

This script is intended to be run as a cron job. You can also run it as a Docker
container (see below).

## Building

Build the debian package:

```sh
$ apt-get install git devscripts debhelper
$ git clone https://github.com/spotify/docker-gc.git
$ cd docker-gc
$ debuild -us -uc -b
```

If you get lintian errors during `debuild`, try `debuild --no-lintian -us -uc -b`.


## Installing

```sh
$ dpkg -i ../docker-gc_0.0.4_all.deb
```

This installs the `docker-gc` script into `/usr/sbin` and drops a `docker-gc`
cron file into `/etc/cron.hourly/`.


## Usage

To use the script manually, run `docker-gc`. The system user under
which `docker-gc` runs needs to have read and write access to
the `$STATE_DIR` environment variable which defaults to `/var/lib/docker-gc`.


### Excluding Images From Garbage Collection

There can be images that are large that serve as a common base for
many application containers, and as such, make sense to pin to the
machine, as many derivative containers will use it.  This can save
time in pulling those kinds of images.  There may be other reasons to
exclude images from garbage collection.  To do so, create
`/etc/docker-gc-exclude`, or if you want the file to be read from
elsewhere, set the `EXCLUDE_FROM_GC` environment variable to its
location.  This file can contain image name patterns (in the `grep`
sense), one per line, such as `spotify/cassandra:latest` or it can
contain image ids (truncated to the length shown in `docker images`
which is 12.

An example excludes file might contain:
```
spotify/cassandra:latest
9681260c3ad5
```

### Excluding Containers From Garbage Collection

There can also be containers (for example data only containers) which 
you would like to exclude from garbage collection. To do so, create 
`/etc/docker-gc-exclude-containers`, or if you want the file to be 
read from elsewhere, set the `EXCLUDE_CONTAINERS_FROM_GC` environment 
variable to its location. This file should container name patterns (in 
the `grep` sense), one per line, such as `mariadb-data`.

An example excludes file might contain:
```
mariadb-data
drunk_goodall
```

### Running as a Docker Image

A Dockerfile is provided as an alternative to a local installation. By default
the container will start up, run a single garbage collection, and shut down.

The image is currently built with Docker 1.6.2, but to build it against a newer
Docker version (to ensure that the API version of the command-line interface
matches with your Docker daemon), simply edit [the `ENV DOCKER_VERSION` line in
`Dockerfile`][dockerfile-ENV] prior to the build step below.

[dockerfile-ENV]: https://github.com/spotify/docker-gc/blob/fd6640fa8c133de53a0395a36e8dcbaf29842684/Dockerfile#L3

#### Build the Docker Image

```sh
docker build -t spotify/docker-gc .
```

#### Running as a Docker Container

The docker-gc container requires access to the docker socket in order to
function, so you need to map it when running, e.g.:

```sh
docker run --rm -v /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock -v /etc:/etc spotify/docker-gc
```
